The following content is provided under a Creative
Commons license.
Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare
continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.
To make a donation or to view additional materials
from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare
at ocw.mit.edu.
So if you remember last time, we looked at parametric equations.
So as a way of describing the motion of a point that moves in the plane or in space,
as a function of time or your favorite parameter that will tell you how far the motion has progressed.
And I think we did in detail the example of the cycloid, which is the curve traced
by a point on a wheel that's rolling on a flat surface.
So we have this example where we have this wheel that's rolling on the x-axis.
And we have this point on the wheel.
And as it moves around, it traces a trajectory that looked more or less like this.
OK, so I'm trying a new color.
Is this visible from the back?
Good.
So no more blue.
OK.
So remember, in general, we are trying to find the position.
So x of t, y of t, maybe z of t, if we're in space, of a moving point, a longer trajectory.
And one way to think about this is in terms of the position vector.
So the position vector is just the vector whose components are the coordinates of the point.
OK, so if you prefer, that's the same thing as the vector from the origin.
So again, to the moving point.
So maybe our point is here, p.
So this vector here is vector op.
t.
And that's also the position vector of t.
So just to give you, again, that example, if I take the cycloid for a wheel of radius
1, and let's say that we are going at unit speed so that the angle that we used as a parameter
less time is the same thing as time.
Then the position vector, in this case, we found to be, just to make sure that they have
it right, t minus sine t and cosine t.
No, 1 minus cosine t.
OK, same, that's formula that you should have in your notes from less time, except we had
theta instead of t because we were using the angle.
But now I'm saying we're moving at unit speed, so time and angle are the same thing.
OK, so now what's interesting about this is we can analyze the motion in more detail.
So now that we know the position of a point as a function of time, we can try to study
how it varies and the particular things like the speed and the acceleration.
So let's start with speed.
Well, in fact, we can do better than speed.
Let's not start with speed.
So speed is a number.
It tells you how fast you're going along your trajectory.
I mean, if you're driving in a car, then it tells you how fast you're going.
But unless you have one of these fancy cars with a GPS, it doesn't tell you in which direction
you're going.
And that's useful information, too, if you're trying to figure out what your trajectory
is.
So in fact, there's two aspects to it.
One is how fast you're going and the other is in what direction you're going.
That means actually we should use a vector, maybe, to think about this.
And so that's called the velocity vector.
And the way we can get it, so it's called, usually, V.
So V here stands for velocity, more than four vector.
And you just get it by taking the derivative of a position vector with respect to time.
OK, now it's our first time writing this kind of thing with a vector.
So the basic rule is you can take the derivative of a vector quantity just by taking the derivatives
of each component.
OK, so that's just the x dt, the y dt.
And if you have the component, this is dt.
OK, so let's see what it is for the cycloid.
So in the example of a cycloid, well, so what do we get when we take the derivative of
this formula over there?
Well, so the derivative of t is 1 minus cosinty.
The derivative of 1 is 0.
The derivative of minus cosinty is sint.
Very good.
That's at least one thing you should remember from single variable calculus.
Hopefully you'll remember even more than that.
OK, so that's the velocity vector.
It tells us at any time how fast we are going in what direction.
So for example, observe, remember, last time at the end of class, we were trying to figure out what
exactly happens near the bottom point.
You know, when we have this motion that seems to stop and go backwards.
And we answered that one way.
But let's try to understand it in terms of velocity.
What if I plug t equals 0 in here?
Then 1 minus cosinty is 0.
Sinty is 0.
The velocity is 0.
So at that time, at that particular time, our point is actually not moving.
Of course, it's been moving just before and it starts moving just afterwards.
It's just, you know, the instant, at that particular instant, the speed is 0.
So that's slightly maybe counter-intuitive thing that something is moving.
And at that time, it's actually stopped.
Now, let's see.
So that's a vector.
And it's useful.
But if you want just the usual speed as a number, then what will you do?
Well, you'll just take exactly the magnitude of this vector.
So speed, which is the scalar quantity, is going to be just the magnitude of a vector v.
So in this case, well, it would be square root of 1 minus cosinty squared plus sin squared
t.
And if you expand that, well, so you will get, let me take a bit more space, that's going
to be square root of 1 minus 2 cosinty plus cosint squared t plus sin squared t seems
to simplify a little bit because we have cosint squared plus sin squared, that's 1.
So it's going to be square root of 2 minus 2 cosinty.
So at this point, if I was going to ask you, when is the speed the smallest of the largest,
you could answer based on that.
See, a t equals 0, well, that turns out to be 0.
The point is not moving.
A t equals pi, that ends up being square root of 2 plus 2, which is 4.
So that's 2, and that's when you actually add the top of the arch, and that's when
the point is moving the fastest.
In fact, there, it's moving twice as fast as the wheel, because the wheel is moving to
the right at unit speed, and the point is also rotating, so it's moving to the right at
unit speed relative to the center, so that the two effects add up and give you a speed
of 2.
Anyway, that's the formula we can get.
Now, what about acceleration?
So here, I should warn you that there's a serious discrepancy between the usual, maybe intuitive
notion of acceleration, the one that you are aware of when you drive a car, and the
one that will be using.
So you might think acceleration is just the derivative of speed.
If my car goes 55 miles an hour on the highway, then it's going at constant speed, it's
not accelerating.
But let's say that I'm taking a really tight turn, then I'm going to feel something.
There's some force being exerted.
And in fact, there is a sideways acceleration at that point, even for the speed is not
changing.
So, the definition we'll take of acceleration is as a vector, and the acceleration vector
is just the derivative of a velocity vector.
So, even if speed is constant, that means even if the length of the velocity vector stays
the same, the velocity vector can still rotate.
And as it rotates, that produces acceleration.
And so this is the notion of acceleration that's relevant in physics.
For example, when you write f equals ma, that's really what a, that's the a that you have
in mind here.
It's a vector.
Of course, if you're moving in a straight line, then the two notions are the same.
Acceleration is also going to be along the line, and it's going to have to do with the
derivative of speed.
But in general, that's not quite the same.
So for example, let's look at the cycloid.
If we take the example of the cycloid, well, what's the derivative of 1 minus cosine
t?
It's sine t.
And what's the derivative of sine t?
Cosine t.
So, the acceleration vector is sine t cosine t.
So in particular, let's look at what happens at time t equals 0 when the point is not
moving.
Well, the acceleration vector there will be 0,1.
So what that means is that if I look at my trajectory at this point, well, then the acceleration
vector is pointing in that direction.
It's the unit vector in the vertical direction.
So, my point is not moving at that particular time, but it's accelerating up.
So that means actually that as it comes down, first it's slowing down, then it stops here,
and then it reverses going back up.
OK, so that's another way to understand what we were saying last time that the trajectory
at that point has a vertical tangency.
Because that's the direction in which the motion is going to occur just before and just after
time 0.
OK, any questions about that?
No.
OK, so I should insist maybe on one thing, which is that so we can differentiate vectors
just component by component.
And we can differentiate vector expressions according to certain rules that we'll see
in a moment, one thing that we cannot do, it's not true that the length of the R dt, which
is the speed, is equal to the length R dt.
This is completely false, and they're really not the same.
OK, so if you have to differentiate the length of a vector, then basically you're in trouble.
If you really, really want to do it, well, the length of a vector is the square root of the
sums of the squares of the components, and from that you can use formula for the derivative
of the square root and the chain rule and various other things, and you can get there.
But it will not be a very nice expression.
There's no simple formula for this kind of thing.
Fortunately, we almost never have to compute this kind of thing, because after all it's not
very relevant quantity, what's more relevant might be this one.
This is actually the speed.
This one, I don't know what it means in general.
OK?
So let's continue our exploration.
So the next concept that I want to define is that of arc length.
So arc length is just the distance that you have traveled along the curve.
OK?
So if you're in a curve, it has this mileage counter that tells you how far you've gone,
how much fuel you've used if it's a fancy curve.
And what it does is it actually integrates the speed over time to give you the arc length
along the trajectory of a curve.
So the usual notation that we'll have is S for arc length.
I'm not quite sure how you get an S out of this, but it's the usual notation.
OK?
So S is the distance traveled along the trajectory.
And for that to make sense, of course, we need to fix a reference point.
Maybe on the cycloid, we'd say it's the distance starting from the origin.
In general, maybe you'll say you start at time equals 0.
But it's a convention.
You could decide if you knew in advance you could have actually your car's mileage counter
to count backwards from the point where the car will die and stop working.
That would be slightly freaky.
But you could have certainly a negative arc length that gets closer and closer to 0
and gets to 0 at the end of the trajectory or anything you want.
I mean, arc length would be positive or negative.
Typically, it's negative when you're before the reference point and positive afterwards.
So now, how does it relate to the things we've seen there?
Well, so in particular, how do you relate arc length and time?
Well, so there's a simple relation, which is that the rate of change of arc length
there's a time, well, that's going to be the speed at which you're moving.
Because the speed, as a scalar quantity, tells you how much distance you're covering
per unit time.
And in fact, to be completely honest, I should put an absolute value here.
Because there's examples of curves, maybe where your motion is going back and forth
along the same curve and then you don't want to keep counting arc length all the time.
Actually, maybe you want to say that the arc length increases than decreases along the curve.
I mean, you get to choose how you count it.
But in this case, if you're moving back and forth, it would make more sense to have
the arc length first increase, then decrease, increase again and so on.
So, if you want to know really what the arc length is, then basically the only way to do
it is to integrate speed versus time.
So if you wanted to know how long an arc of cycloid is, you have this nice looking curve,
how long is it?
Well, you'd have to basically integrate this quantity from t equal to 0 to 2 pi.
So how to integrate that.
So we don't actually have a formula for the length at this point.
However, we'll see one later using a cool trick and multivariable calculus.
So for now, we'll just leave a formula like that and we don't know how long it is.
Well, you can put that into your calculator and get a numerical value.
But that's the best I can offer.
Now another useful notion is the unit tangent vector to the trajectory.
So the usual notation is t hat.
It has a hat because it's a unit vector and t because it's tangent.
Now how do we get this unit tangent vector?
So maybe I should have pointed out before that if you're moving along some trajectory,
so you're going in that direction, then when you're at this point, the velocity vector
is going to be tangent to the trajectory.
It tells you the direction of motion in particular.
So if you want a unit vector that goes in the same direction, all you have to do is
just rescale it so that its length becomes 1.
So it's v divided by magnitude of v.
So it seems like now we have a lot of different things that should be related in some way.
So let's see what we can say.
Well, we can say that dR by dt, so that's the velocity vector.
That's the same thing as if I use the chain rule, dR dS times dS dt.
Okay?
So let's think about these things.
So this guy here, we've just seen that's the same as the speed.
So this one here should be v divided by its length.
So that means this actually should be the unit tangent vector.
Okay, so let me rewrite that.
It's t dS dt.
So maybe if I actually stated directly that way, see, I'm just saying the velocity vector has a length
and a direction. The length is the speed. The direction is tangent to the trajectory.
So the speed is dS dt and the tangent vector is t hat.
And that's how we get this.
Okay?
So let's try just to see why dR dS should be t.
Well, let's think of dR dS.
dR dS means, you know, position vector r means you have the origin, which is somewhere out there.
And the vector r is here.
So dR dS means we move by a small amount delta s along the trajectory by a certain distance delta s.
And we look at how the position vector changes.
Well, we'll have a small change.
Let me call that vector delta r corresponding to the size, corresponding to the length delta s.
And now,
delta r should be essentially roughly equal to, well, its direction will be tangent to the trajectory.
If I take a small enough interval, then the motion will be almost tangent to the trajectory.
Times the length of it will be delta s, the distance that I have traveled.
Maybe I should, sorry, maybe I should, we explained that on a separate board.
Okay, so let's say that we have an amount of time delta t.
So let's zoom into that curve.
Okay, so we have r at time t.
We have r at time t plus delta t.
This vector here I will call delta r.
The length of this vector is delta s.
And the direction is essentially that of a tangent vector.
So delta s over delta t, that's the amount, that's the distance traveled divided by the time.
That's going to be close to the speed.
And delta r is approximately t times delta s.
So now if I divide both sides by delta t, I get this.
And if I take the limit as delta t tends to zero, then I get the same formula with derivatives
and with an equality, it's the same approximation.
The approximation becomes better and better if I go to smaller intervals.
Okay.
Okay, are there any questions about this?
Yes?
I said the direction, you would see tangent to the curve.
You said when you're trying to do that, you would see a tangent.
So it's a tangent.
Yes, that's correct.
So let's be more careful actually.
So you're asking about whether delta r is actually strictly tangent to the curve.
Is that it seems like if your first time around the other time that I've all incurred,
any other time that comes across, it wouldn't be tangent, but tangent.
That's correct.
Actually, delta r is not strictly tangent to anything.
So maybe I should draw another picture.
If I'm going from here to here, then delta r is going to be this arc inside the curve,
while the tangent vector will be going in this direction.
Okay.
So they're not strictly parallel to each other.
And that's why it's only approximately equal.
Similarly, this distance, the length of delta r is not exactly the length along the curve.
It's actually a bit shorter.
But if you imagine a smaller and smaller portion of the curve,
then this effect of the curve being a curve and not a straight line becomes more and more
negligible.
If you zoom into the curve sufficiently, then it looks more and more like a straight line.
And then what I said becomes true in the limit.
Okay.
Any other questions?
So what happens next?
Okay. So let me show you a nice example of why we might want to use vectors
to study parametric curves.
Because after all a lot of what's here, you can just do in coordinates.
And we don't really need vectors.
Well, actually, vectors being a language, you know, you never strictly need it,
but it's useful to have an ocean of vectors.
So I want to tell you a bit about Kepler's second low
of celestial mechanics.
So that goes back from, that goes back to 16.09.
So that's not exactly recent news, okay.
But still, I think it's a very interesting example of why you might want to use vector
methods to analyze motions.
So what happens, what happens back then is Kepler was trying to observe the motion of planets
in the sky and trying to come up with general explanations of how they move.
Before him, people were saying, well, they kind of move in a circle,
but maybe it's more complicated than that.
We need to add smaller circular motions on top of each other and so on.
They had more and more complicated theories.
And then Kepler came with these laws that say basically that planets move in an ellipse
around the sun and that they move in a very specific way along that ellipse.
So there's actually three laws, but let me just tell you about the second one,
that has a very nice vector interpretation.
So what Kepler's second law says is that the motion of planets
is, first of all, they move in a plane.
And second, the
area
swept out by the line from the sun to the planet is swept at constant time.
So it's swept at constant rate.
From the sun to the planet.
The area is swept out by the line at a constant rate.
So that's an interesting law because it tells you
once you know what the orbit of a planet looks like,
it tells you how fast it's going to move on that orbit.
So let me explain again.
So this law says, you know, maybe the sun,
let's put the sun here at the origin.
And let's have a planet.
Well, the planet orbits around the sun
in some trajectory.
So this is supposed to be light blue.
Can you see it as different from white?
No, okay, mini-veh.
Okay, doesn't really matter.
So the planet moves on its orbit.
And if you wait for a certain time,
then you know, a bit later it will be here, then here and so on,
then you can look at the amount of area,
you know, inside this triangular wedge.
And the claim is that the amount of area in here
is proportional to the time it lapsed.
So in particular, if the planet is closer to the sun,
then it has to go faster.
And if it's further away from the sun,
then it has to go slower so that the area
remains proportional to time.
So that's a very sophisticated prediction.
And I think the way he came to it was really just
by using a lot of observations and trying to measure
what things, you know, what was true, it wasn't true.
But let's try to see how we can understand that
in terms of what we know today about mechanics.
So in fact, what happens is that Newton,
so Newton was quite a bit later, I mean, that was the late 17th century,
instead of beginning of the 17th century.
So he was able to explain this using his laws for
gravitational attraction.
And you'll see that if we reformulate Kepler's law in terms of vectors,
then, and if we work up it with these vectors,
we're going to end up with something that's actually
in completely obvious to us now.
At the time, it was very far from obvious.
But to us now, it's completely obvious.
So let's try to see what does Kepler's law say in terms of vectors.
Okay.
So let's think of what kinds of vectors we might want to have in here.
Well, it might be good to think of maybe the position vector.
And maybe it's variation.
So if we wait as to an amount of time, we'll have a vector delta R,
which is the change in position vector of a certain interval of time.
So let's start with the first step.
What's the most complicated thing in here?
It's this area swept out by the line.
How do we express that area in terms of vectors?
Well, I've almost given the answer by drawing this picture.
If I take a sufficiently small amount of time,
this graded region looks like a triangle.
So we have to find the area of the triangle.
Well, we know how to do that now.
So the area is approximately equal to one half of the area of a parallelogram
that I could form from these vectors.
And the area of a parallelogram is given by the magnitude of a cross-product.
Okay. So I should say this is the area swept in time delta T.
And you should think of delta T as relatively small.
I mean, at the scale of a planet, that might still be a few days,
but small compared to the overall trajectory.
So now, let's remember that the amount they which we moved,
delta R, is approximately equal to V times delta T.
And just using the definition of a velocity vector.
So let's use that.
Well, sorry, so it's again approximately equal to R cross V magnitude times delta T.
I can take out the delta T, which is a scalar.
So now, what does it mean to say that area is swept at a constant rate?
It means this thing is proportional to delta T.
So that means, so the last says, in fact, that the length of this cross-product R cross V
equals constant.
R cross V has constant length.
Any questions about that?
No. Yes.
Yes, let me try to explain that again.
So what I'm claiming is that the length of the cross-product R cross V
measures the rate at which area is swept by the position vector.
I should say, with a factor of two, one half of this length is the rate at which area is swept.
How do we see that?
Well, let's take a small time interval delta T. In time delta T, our planet moves by V delta T.
So if it moves by V delta T, it means that this triangle up there has two sides.
One is the position vector R, the other one is V delta T. So it's area is given by one half
of the magnitude of a cross-product. That's the formula we've seen for the area of the triangle
in space. So the area is one half of the cross-product R and V delta T.
Magnitude of the cross-product. So to say that the rate at which area is swept is constant
means that these two are proportional, area divided by delta T is constant over time.
And so this is constant.
Now what about the other half of the law?
Well, it says that the motion is no plane.
And so we have a plane in which the movement takes place
and it contains also the sun and it contains the trajectory.
So let's think about that plane.
Well, I claim that the position vector is in the plane. That's what we are saying.
But there's another vector that I know is in the plane.
Well, you could say the position vector at another time or at any time.
But in fact, what's also true is that the velocity vector is in the plane.
If I'm moving in a plane, then position and velocity are in there.
So the plane of motion contains R and V.
So what's the direction of the cross-product R cross V?
Well, it's the direction that's perpendicular to this plane.
So it's normal to the plane of motion.
And that means now that actually we've put the two statements in there
into a single form because we are saying R cross V has constant length and constant direction.
In fact, in general, maybe I should say something about this.
So if you just look at the position vector and the velocity vector for any motion at any given time,
then together we determine some plane.
And that's the plane that contains the origin, the point, and the velocity vector.
If you want it's the plane in which the motion seems to be going at the given time.
Now, of course, if your motion is not in a plane, then that plane will change.
It's somehow the instant, you know, the plane in which the motion is taking place at the given time.
And to say that the motion actually stays in that plane, however,
means that this guy will not change direction.
Okay, so...
So Kepler's second law is actually equivalent to saying that R cross V equals constant, equals a constant vector.
Okay, that's what the law says.
So in terms of derivatives, it means d by dt of R cross V is the zero vector.
Okay, now...
So there's an interesting thing to know, which is that we can use the usual product rule for
derivatives with vector expressions, with dot products or cross products.
There's only one catch, which is that when we differentiate a cross product,
we have to be careful that the guy on the left stays on the left, the guy on the right stays on the right.
Okay, so if you know uv prime equals u prime v plus uv prime, then you're safe.
If you know it as u prime v plus v prime u, then you're not safe.
Okay, so that's the only thing to watch for.
So...
Product rule is okay for taking the derivative of a dot product,
where you don't actually even need to be very careful about
or their own things or derivative of a cross product, where you just need to be a little bit more careful.
Okay, so now that we know that, we can write this as dr dt cross V plus r cross dv dt.
Okay.
Well, let's reformulate things slightly.
So dr dt already has a name, in fact, that's V. Okay, that's what we call the velocity vector.
So this is V cross V plus r cross, what is dv dt? That's the acceleration, a equals zero.
Okay, so now what's the next step?
Well, we know what V cross V is, because remember a vector of cross itself is always zero.
Okay, so...
So this is the same as r cross a equals zero, and that's the same as saying that,
you know, the cross product of two vectors is zero exactly when the parallelogram that we form
has no area. And the way in which that happens is if they're actually parallel to each other.
So that means the acceleration is parallel to the position. Okay, so in fact what Kepler's
second law says is that the acceleration is parallel to the position vector.
And since we know that acceleration is caused by a force, that's equivalent to the fact that
the gravitational force is parallel to the position vector. That means, well, you know,
if you have a Sun here at the origin. And if you have your planet, well, the gravitational
force caused by the Sun should go along this line. And thanks a lot, doesn't even say
we're going towards the Sun or away from the Sun. Well, what we know now is that, of course,
the attraction is towards the Sun. But Kepler's law would also be true, actually, if things were
going away. So in particular, say, electric force also has this property of being towards the
central charge. So actually, if you look at motion of charged particles in an electric field,
caused by a point charged particle, it also satisfies Kepler's law. Satisfies the same law.
Okay, that's the end for today. Thanks.